---
layout: post
title: "Thanks Be Unto..."
date: 2022-11-24 17:27:00
---
I’ve never been good at expressing gratitude. It’s not so much that I’m ungrateful, because I’m incredibly thankful for my life and the people in it, but showing that gratitude hasn’t typically come naturally for me.

For some reason, putting thanks into words has always felt performative or insincere to me, as if words aren’t enough. It’s silly, I know, but I’ve always felt more comfortable *showing* my thanks through action. But, today is a day of thanks, and I think it’s important to [breathe into my discomfort](/2022/10/27/breathing-into-discomfort.html) (see what I did there?) and put into words a few of the very specific things that I am thankful for right now (outside of the typical “my family” and “my job”):

1. That first cup of coffee in the morning
2. A fresh set of clean sheets
3. The steam-room simulating mist setting on my showerhead
4. The convenience of the internet, despite our complicated relationship
5. That my parents not only put up with my fascination with computers at a young age, but actively supported it by helping me find opportunities to learn
6. Coming home from work and being greeted by my kids with a hurricane of love
7. The timeless appeal of my vintage Casio calculator watch
8. Ad blockers
9. Microsoft’s support of discontinued product activation via phone
10. The endless education opportunities on YouTube
11. My morning journaling habit
12. The growing revival of audio cassettes
13. Intermittent fasting and it’s positive effect on my digestion
16. Having easy access to clean water
17. Living so close to the mountains, and the perspective they provide
18. My (growing) collection of typewriters
19. The opportunity to watch my kids learn new things
20. The extra solitude that comes with taking the long way home
21. All of the books and the bookstores they come from
22. Always having enough food to feed my family
23. The smell, sounds, service, and general vibe of libraries
24. That moment of silent reflection a walk through a cemetery brings
25. Experiencing new things with my wife
26. Everything, both favorable and unfavorable, because it’s all part of the complete experience of life

--

_This is post 024 of [#100DaysToOffload](https://100daystooffload.com/)_
